# Listen
_March 8, 2016_ <br>
Reflecting today on International Women’s day I am thinking about a focus group I participated in for women that have had experience with government services.  The focus group was hosted by a non-profit women’s advocacy group called 9-5 Working Women. This focus group was incredibly enlightening, powerful, and overall a great experience to be a part of.  This reflection I did quickly (quickly by my writing standard). It is perhaps a bit rambly, none the less, writing this was a really great exercise. In my career I do not write too much but I should. I need to start a blog like asap.
## Background
My parents are quite well off, but there were several years of my life when I did benefit from a few government programs: Pregnancy Medicaid, WIC vouchers, Medicaid for my son, and food stamps (EBT).  I was in school, working part time as a cashier, and taking care of my baby son. I feel a need to state that I was working and going to school followed by stating that I received government assistance because I feel the need to explain that I am not lazy.  I am a big advocate of public assistance programs and I do not think that people that receive public assistance are any more or less lazy than any other person in society. It is a dominant mindset in our society that generally people who receive government assistance are “lazy.”  Insecure about the mindset of the mainstream, I feel the need to convey that I was working 20-30 hours per week, going to school full time, being a young mother and I loved receiving government assistance.  The government assistance I received was an immense blessing. I was able to birth my son at no financial cost, which is huge.  My son has a thyroid condition and Medicaid has saved me tons of money in all the blood tests he has to do.  Food stamps were so helpful. I still keep my EBT card with my other sentimental objects like movie tickets and family photos, I am nostalgic.  Each month, I didn’t have to budget for groceries. I still had to use my own money on groceries as well, the food stamps did not last the whole month.  I could buy healthy food and invite people over for dinner. I could still socialize with friends at my place when I didn’t have enough to go out to dinner with friends.  WIC vouchers were kind of helpful but my ADHD mind always had a difficult time getting the correct items. Often I would cause a major stall at the checkout line and would be subjected to looks from other customers. <br>
Overall these programs were extremely beneficial in my life but these programs are no piece of cake to obtain.  To navigate these systems, you have to be quite mentally stable and organized.  There are a lot of people out there that desperately need assistance and are in sticky or dangerous situations but are just not quite mentally there but do not necessarily have a diagnosed “mental disability.” And forget mental disability, you just have to be an organized person, while managing all the other stuff in your life this is just simply hard to do.  There are quite a lot of different papers you have to submit. If you don’t have a scanner and a desktop computer this becomes harder. If you don’t have a phone and a stable address, you might be screwed. If you forget your password, it will be very difficult, perhaps impossible to recover because you have to call a number which takes around an hour to get through then you might talk with someone that can address the issue.  The biggest hurdle is the telephone interview. You apply and submit your documents and wait a month or so to receive a letter in the mail stating that you are denied food stamps for missing a telephone interview you were never notified of or called for.  The process, not just with food stamps makes you feel stupid.  I was making straight As, how could I not figure out government assistance?  After college I found a position in my field as an intern and was very close to the income level cut off. In February of 2014 I was denied food stamps by 82 CENTS!  I am not making this up I can show you the paper.  The limit was $1,681 per month; I made 82 cents over that amount.  This was devastating and very stressful.  
## Data and Research, the Focus Group Experience
In the focus group, sitting next to me was a fellow mother who was staying in a homeless shelter. I asked her if she knew that the Housing Choice Voucher Program (HCV) also known as Section 8 was opening it wait list on Monday.  Mind you, this is just to apply to the waiting list, which has not been open in Georgia for over TEN years. The wait list opening was open for only ONE week so if you are reading this now it is closed, sorry.  The woman next to me I am speaking of pulled out a folder with this press release and gave it to the organizer to make copies and give out to the group.  You see, I work at the state agency that runs this program.  I know about the press release because it came in my work email.  This woman living with her daughter at a homeless shelter came more prepared than me to distribute the HCV wait list opening information.  She had all her important documents neatly organized with her. I never carry around a folder that organized unless I am at a job interview.  If I need to retrieve an important document, I’ll have to get back to you on that and I have a stable home.  You have to be organized to navigate the system. Living under the stress of poverty and uncertainty puts strain on your mental capacity to think, cope, and move beyond your situation. Essentially for many this erodes your capability to think straight.  Enhanced with already existing learning disability combined with a mentally toxic relationship, and all the other shit in life as in my case, navigating programs became that much more difficult. <br>
Going into the focus group I figured that I know all about the usefulness and difficulties of government programs through my experience.  In the larger context of the room full of these amazing women I realized that my experience is among a piece of the larger struggle that women face navigating living in the US.  Through personal accounts we uncovered so much data. I am a bit of a data nerd, so I say data.  The insight gained was simply profound.  Insights of personal experience are insurmountable to data alone.  There was such a relief through validation of experiences, it was healing.  We live in a very free country for women compared to places like Jordan or Saudi Arabia, but there is plenty of work to do here yet. There is so much that women today in the US and specifically Atlanta, a city with a bourgeoning tech, business, service, and transportation industry are subjected to. First there is finding a job. Who will watch your kid and how will you pay for it?  Then there is job discrimination. There were several accounts of gender discrimination. One woman was told by an employer in a male dominated industry that they simply don’t hire women, yes in Atlanta.  Another was pressured out of her workplace after so much harassment.  Another woman was questioned about a court case in an interview.  The court case was due to a rape, she should have privacy.  After being physically and mentally assaulted she is then questioned as an emotional liability to an employer, furthering this attack on her as a person.  Doesn’t matter that this is illegal, these experiences still happen apparently. So you get a job, you may face discrimination and harassment (and I’m not even covering race in this reflection there is so much more ground to cover) of course you are a woman, then you must pay to work.  Day care is quite expensive then there is the issue of quality of care. Several women spoke about this issue.  Oftentimes, especially with GA’s low minimum wage, day care costs more than what you get paid.  There is the CAPS program which is daycare payment assistance but you have to somehow work and make very little money to qualify. I never qualified for it.  The program also does not help you while you do the work of looking for a job.  <br>

## Today
Today’s google doodle shows a video of women around the world saying “One day I will…” The last statement says “one day we will see every girl in school.”  This brings tears to my eyes. Education is so important and this is the best way for women to advance globally.  College education is a great way to start a career and get a higher salary, but college is not free here.  Fortunately for me I had the HOPE Scholarship and only had to do one year of student loans. Tuition is one cost then there is cost of housing.  A friend posted on facebook about a study that women are staying in abusive relationships longer because they cannot find an affordable place to live.  Go on craigslist and see all the adds for a “live in girlfriend.” Men are essentially asking for sex maids in exchange for rent.  I do believe that these scenarios are not as uncommon as we would like to think. <br>
Working for the government I have learned about the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program.  Basically these are apartments that are reserved for low-income families.  When I broke with my ex I was frantically looking for a place to live.  I ended up finding a fairly cheap and semi-decent place (depends on what kind of perspective you take) off Candler Road.  My mom then very generously bought me a car (class privilege), so transportation was not an issue for me. Not until I was tasked with mapping out the affordable apartments properties did I learn about the existence of this program and these apartments throughout the city I could have qualified for.  This brings me to my main and personal strong opinion about government programs – we need better data management, visibility, and accessibility.  This focus stems out of two reasons – one my personal experience, and two I am a data person.  Beyond policy reform and increasing customer service, I strongly feel that improving visibility, data management, and technology is the best way to improve programs that can benefit people.  What good is a program if you cannot find out about it?  What good is a program if you cannot find out if you should bother applying to it?  In the age of smart phones and amazing apps that enrich our lives I should be able to pull up an app enter basic information such as income, dependents, and location and see what I might qualify for.  <br>
At the end of the focus group we talked about solutions although mine are largely centered around data and technology, many of the women said the solution is to listen.  This is incredibly powerful, listen.  Of all the issues and problems we talked about, the first step to solving them is to listen.  We need to listen to who we serve in government, this is how we will have effective programs. <br>
I now have a salary I am now “on the other side” working for a state agency that administers government programs.  I am blessed to work in a family friendly workplace and even as I write this I was sitting with coworkers outside, that is a huge amount of privilege.  I have personal experience and I am a listener.  I am innovative and visionary and it is my goal make programs to meet user and customer needs. Smart phones are a technological revolution for the working class and our communication of information should reflect current technology.  I feel like there are so many technologically innovative people in Atlanta that want to develop or program something and I feel like there are so many things that need to be developed in my organization. It is my goal to consummate the technology class with the working class.  Let’s develop password recovery, apps to locate low income housing, apps to locate homeless shelters, apps for Housing Choice Voucher (Section 8), let’s listen and make an app for that! Let’s do it!
